[Yb2(BDC)3(DMF)2]⋅H2O was synthesised under solvothermal conditions (BDC=benzene‐1,4‐dicarboxylate and DMF=N,N‐dimethylformamide). Ytterbium(III) chloride hexahydrate (1 mmol) and benzene‐1,4‐dicarboxylic acid (15 mmol) were dissolved in DMF (5 mL). To this, H2O (0.15 mL) was added and the mixture stirred until complete dissolution of all reagents had occurred. The reactants were heated in a sealed 20 mL Teflon‐lined autoclave at 100 °C for 20 hours. The resulting white crystalline solid was isolated by suction filtration. In situ crystallisation studies were carried out on Beamline I12 (JEEP) of the Diamond Light Source.16 A specially constructed reaction cell made from polyether ether ketone (PEEK) was used to investigate solvothermal crystallisation: a 5 mL internal volume tube of 12 mm internal diameter that was fitted with a screw‐top lid that allowed moderate pressure to be contained and reactions up to 150 °C to be investigated. An internal thermocouple, threaded through the lid of the reaction tube allowed continuous monitoring of temperature during reactions. The reaction was stirred rapidly with a smaller Teflon‐coated magnetic follower to aid heat transfer and to ensure that uniform solid product was present in the X‐ray beam throughout the experiment. The tube was heated within the ODISC infra‐red furnace,17 with a glassy carbon sheath around the sample to allow heat transfer to the reaction vessel. A wavelength of 0.2242 Å was used and 2D diffraction patterns collected every minute using a Pixium image plate detector (430×430 mm2) with an exposure time of 4000 ms. The system was calibrated with a crystalline CeO2 reference and the 2D image plate data were integrated using the fit2d software to give 1D diffraction patterns.18 The time‐resolved in situ data sets were analysed using sequential Pawley decompositions and Rietveld refinements, as implemented in TOPAS.19 CCDC 1057461 contain the supplementary crystallographic data for this paper. These data can be obtained free of charge from The Cambridge Crystallographic Data Centre.
